{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25400\viewh13960\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 # Assignment: Re-epigraphing Middlemarch [title in progress: we are open to alternatives.] \
Created by the Spring 2015 members[1] of English 111: Victorian Novel Research Seminar for the future members of the seminar. \
\
*Middlemarch* is thinking hard about the relationship between fragmentation and wholeness, about strong and weak theories, and about the excerptability and extractability of literary texts. (See for example Leah Price, *The Anthology and the Rise of the Novel*.) In this short assignment, we will play with chapter epigraphs, asking whether they can be used to theorize their chapter - and perhaps even their book or the entire novel.  \
\
Each of you gets a partner. Each pair is assigned the same two chapters. \
\
So for example, George and Eliot are assigned chapters 18 and 19. George reads the epigraph to chapter 18 and a prepared version of chapter 19 sans epigraph. Eliot reads the epigraph to chapter 19 and a prepared version of chapter 18 sans epigraph. \
\
Step by step: \
\
## Step 1: hypothetizing, guessing, prospective interpretation \
Read the epigraph from your assigned chapter. DO NOT READ THE CHAPTER. Assuming that the epigraph is a theory of the chapter (a major assumption), write a quick paragraph guessing what the chapter might be about. \
\
## Step 2: research \
Spend 15-30 minutes doing informal research on the epigraph and its source text: when was it published? Who wrote it? Does a particular character speak the epigraph? Does the epigraph have a particular literary history? \
\
## Step 3: a reading\
Read the chapter belonging to the epigraph you read in Step 1. Develop an argument about the chapter using the epigraph as a kind of theory. Think about the relation between the epigraph and its own source text as well as the relation between the epigraph and the chapter. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf0 ## Step 4: epigraph creation\
Read your other assigned chapter sans epigraph. Come up with 1) a brief theory of the chapter and 2) your own epigraph for the chapter - either drawn from an existing work or written yourself. Note that if you choose to draw from a text that post-dates *Middlemarch*, you will be responsible for the literary-historical time warp consequences. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
## Step 5: comparing\
Compare your epigraph with the actual epigraph. Compare your epigraphless reading of the chapter with your partner\'92s epigraphed reading. \
\
## Step 6\
After completing your reading of Book II, you and your partner present the epigraphs you created to the rest of the class and ask them to guess to which chapter they belong. \
\
## Step 7\
What have we learned? Contextualize this exercise with the scholarly work on epigraphs we have read. \
\
## Extra credit\
Create a remixed *Middlemarch* by replacing all of the Eliot-written and Eliot-selected epigraphs with your own. Extra points for using only texts published after *Middlemarch* or excerpts from *Middlemarch* itself. Extra points if you invent a name for your remix a la Tom Phillips\'92s (Humument)[{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.tomphillips.co.uk/humument"}}{\fldrslt http://www.tomphillips.co.uk/humument}}].\
\
[1]: Rachel Sagner Buurma (professor), Sophie Diamond, Allison Schultes, Geoffrey Shepard, Emily Sullivan, and Deborah Yu.\
\
}