### Discussion Outline 2.2 

###### Trollope’s Research and Realism, + Return
+ the reality effect, Jameson’s Realist Floor-Plan (Rachel can make diagrams) 
+ How does the way in which Trollope describes his novels in his autobiography
(as canvases or portraits of character) support and/or challenge
Barthes’s and Jameson’s arguments about the function of description? 
+ Hawthorne’s “lump of earth” quote from Autobiography 
+ How do Trollope’s accounts of his novels as “a picture of common life” enhance or change
how we read Barthes/Jameson? Would you characterize *Barchester Towers* as being more descriptive or narrative in the way that it presents its story? Is it useful to even ask this question?

Consider:

>"I have already said of [*The Warden*] that it failed altogether in the
purport for which it was intended. But it has a merit of its own,——a
merit by my own perception of which I was enabled to see wherein lay my
whatever strength I did possess. The characters of the bishop, of the
archdeacon, of the archdeacon's wife, and especially of the warden, are
all well and clearly drawn. I had realised to myself a series of
portraits, and had been able so to put them on the canvas that my
readers should see that which I meant them to see. There is no gift
which an author can have more useful to him than this."
(*Autobiography*, 86) 

.

>"I am led therefore to suppose that a good plot,
-- which, to my own feeling, is the most insignificant part of a tale,
-- is that which will most raise it or most condemn it in the public
judgement [...] A novel should give a picture of common life enlivened
by humor and sweetened by pathos. To make that picture worthy of
attention, the canvas should be crowded with real portraits, not of
individuals known to the world or the author, but of created personages
impregnated with traits of character which are known. To my thinking,
the plot is but the vehicle for all this; and when you have the vehicle
without the passengers, a story of mystery in which the agents never
spring to life, you have but a wooden show.” (*Autobiography*,  112)

.

>“There are two kinds of confidence which a reader may have in his
author,--which two kinds the reader who wishes to use his reading well
should carefully discriminate. There is a confidence in facts and a
confidence in vision [...] Research is the weapon used by the former;
observation by the latter [...] I have written very much as I have
travelled about; and though I have been very inaccurate, I have always
written the exact truth as I saw it; — and I have, I think, drawn my
pictures correctly.” (*Autobiography*, 113-114)

##### Seriality #####

How do Trollope’s reflections on publishing *Framley Parsonage* in
serial form challenge, change or complicate what we see as details’
function, a las Barthes, Jameson, Lukasc, or our previous  reading of
Trollope?

Consider:

>"It had already been a principle with me in my art, that no part of a
novel should be published till the entire story was completed [...] I
was aware than an artist should keep in his hand the power of fitting
the beginning of his work to the end [...] When some young lady at the
end of a story cannot be made to be quite perfect in her conduct, that
vivid description of angelic purity with which you laid the first lines
of her portrait should be slightly toned down.” (*Autobiography*, 121-2)

##### Titles and Research #####

###### Sophie’s seminar paper: #######

>"For a nineteenth century reader who was cognizant of the structure of
Anglican authority, it was necessary that Trollope’s characters behaved
in ways that were appropriate to their positions - which were denoted by
their titles. For instance, a bishop held a higher rank than an
archdeacon in the structure of the Anglican church. For this reason,
while Archdeacon Grantly may attempt to organize a coup and subvert
Bishop Proudie’s authority, he must do so subtly. Archdeacon Grantly can
not openly defy the bishop’s authority. However, he does have the power
to chose whom to appoint as the parson of St. Ewold’s. It is for this
reason that Dr. Grantly is able to chose Mr. Arabin, a man who is
guaranteed to cause trouble for Mr. Slope and the bishop. The
intricacies of rank in the Church of England has consequences for the
plot of Barchester Towers in other ways, as well. Because Archdeacon
Grantly is Mr. Slope’s superior, he sees it as an affront when he is
told to speak to the chaplain rather than to the bishop. It is for this
reason that Archdeacon Grantly does not talk to Mr. Slope about Mr.
Harding’s appointment as the warden of Hiram’s Hospital and why he is,
thus, largely left out of that particular front of the battle for
supremacy in Barchester. At this point, the intricate detail which
impresses us with the magisterial eye and control of the author seems
also to be essential to the plot." 

. 

>"The detailed use of titles seems
also essential to the theme. It has a symbolic value. This is a society
of individuals very conscious of their rank vis-à-vis those above and
below and one also in which people generally do not seem content in the
place in which they find themselves. Bishop Proudie does not wish to be
controlled either by his wife or his chaplain. Mr. Slope has ambitions
of rising in the ranks of the Anglican church as well as grand
aspirations of one day becoming a bishop himself. Archdeacon Grantly
would like to become Bishop of Barchester. Mr. Harding would like to be
warden of Hiram’s Hospital again. Mr. Arabin would like preferment and a
somewhat larger living than the one attached to St. Ewold’s. None of
these men are happy with their current positions within the church. That
rank and position was critical was highlighted by the constant
repetition of titles.”

+ How does Sophie’s reading influence not just our understanding of
Barthes-Jameson debate over realism’s details, but of Miller’s argument
about war as societal maintenance? 
+ How do characters function within
their roles defined by their titles, and how much does the “merry war”
arise out of an ambition to escape these titles? (I think we should also
consider what role the Thorne’s party plays in our understanding of
these questions related to ambition and class).

##### Series 

>“And then by placing Framley Parsonage near
Barchester, I was able to fall back upon my old friends Mrs. Proudie and
the archdeacon [...] Of *Framley Parsonage* I need only further say,
that as I wrote it I became more closely than ever acquainted with the
new shire which I had added to the English counties. I had it all in my
mind, -- its roads and railroads, its towns and parishes, its members of
Parliament, and the different hunts which rode over it. I knew all the
great lords and their castles, the squires and their parks, the rectors
and their churches. This was the fourth novel of which I had placed the
scene in Barsetshire, and as I wrote it I made a happy map of the dear
county. Throughout these stories there has been no name given to a
fictitious site which does not represent to me a spot of which I know
all the accessories, as though I had lived and wandered there.”
(*Autobiography*, 124, 132)

From *Barchester Towers*, Chapt. 2:

>“It is hardly necessary that I should give the public any lengthened
biography of Mr. Harding, up to the period of the commencement of this
tale. The public cannot have forgotten how ill that sensible gentleman
bore the attack that was made on him in the columns of the *Jupiter*
[...] Nor can it yet be forgotten that a law-suit was instituted against
him [...]”

From *Framley Parsonage*, Chapt. 2:

>“Framley is in the eastern division of the county of Barsetshire,
which, as all the world knows, is, politically speaking, as true blue a
county as any in England.”

Is it significant that the audience addressed here is “the public” and
“the world,” rather than the “reader,” as is addressed elsewhere in
*Barchester Towers*? Is the referentiality to Barsetshire different from
the referentiality to Mr. Slope’s literary heritage?

##### Miller and the “Merry War” 
Criticism summary introduced
here (by Emily)

Consider Emily’s point that “Miller suggests that the novel manages the
reader’s dissent by proposing an argument that the reader already
partially agrees with, paradoxically empowering them to be, to some
extent, indoctrinated by the novel.”

> “The spiritual exercise of reading the novel catches us in confirming
that which we might wish to bring into question, even before we quite
know what this involves. Accordingly, whatever dissent we do manage is
likely to remain within the bounds of moderation, since we have already
put into practice some of the basic tenets of what gets preached[...]
the novelist can[…] make a necessity of virtue, embedding his political
values in a specific course of formal operations to which any reader of
his novel, including the most hostile, is inevitably subject” (Miller
130)

Rachel will talk a bit about Foucault

Close reading introduced here (by Sophie) 
+ How do we read the “merry
war” between the sexes — is it of more or less importance to Trollope
than the war between the Proudie/Grantly factions? How does it operate
in the conclusion of the novel (can we maybe think back to Waverley
here?)? 
+ Miller argues that by situating the characters within the
framework of the Anglican church, Trollope inscribes his characters
within a ready-made patriarchy that nevertheless demands that they also
share their domestic lives with women. If we know that only men can
actively assume the role of bishop, is Mrs. Proudie ever a threat, or
just a comic character? Are women already defeated in their ambitions to
assume more power? Or do the female characters challenge notions of
spheres of power, as perhaps set up by the varying titles and
circumscribed roles within the Anglican church?

###### Tolerance versus Peace (versus War) ######

Miller argues that
Trollope’s novel actually advocates tolerance — the more tolerant
religious faction can play the merry war game rather than the more
totalitarian Slope and Proudie faction, perhaps because they understand
that societal order is only maintained through that ongoing order.

But, if we think of the “merry war” within the domestic sphere and the
conclusion of the novel, in which (1) Mr Slope is exported vis a vis his
marriage to a Londoner, (2) Mrs. Proudie’s “masculine” ambitions are
regulated through a more peaceful marital situation and (3) Mr. Arabin
and Eleanor are married off, do we think that Trollope advocates the
same tolerance to variations in patterns of gendered behavior? Or do we
think that certain gender roles actually allow for tolerance in the
public sphere? Or do we think it’s about compromise and/or balance
rather than “tolerance”?

Can we also think of the “indoctrination” of the reader, both in terms
of religious/moral and domestic/gendered sensibilities? Where is
“normalization” (Miller) more evident?

Consider: 
>“Of the bishop and his wife very little further need be said.
From that time forth nothing material occurred to interrupt the even
course of their domestic harmony ... [Mr. Proudie] had thoroughly learnt
that his proper sphere of action lay in close contiguity to Mrs.
Proudie’s wardrobe. He never again aspired to disobey, or seemed even to
wish for autocratic diocesan authority…” (Chapter 51)



## February 2: canonical realisms 2 ## some topics: serials and series
(what happens when we try to imagine all six Barsetshire novels as part
of a single world?); religion and the clergy; marriage; travel +
Trollope, *Barchester Towers* (finish) + Trollope, *An Autobiography*
(chapters 1, 5,6,7,8) + E. S. Dallas review of *Barchester Towers* +
Michel Foucault, from *Discipline and Punish* (background to Miller) +
D.A. Miller, Barchester Towers chapter from *The Novel and the Police**
Emily + optional: Fredric Jameson, “The Narrative Impulse,” “Realism and
the Dissolution of Genre” from *The Antinomies of Realism* + workshop:
not reading The Chronicles of Barsetshire (inspired by Paul Fyfe’s  How
To Not Read a Victorian Novel) + optional: Elson, Dames, McKeown,
[Extracting Social Networks from Literary
Fiction](http://www1.cs.columbia.edu/~delson/pubs/ACL2010-
ElsonDamesMcKeown.pdf) + possible workshop preparation: extracting data
from the Barsetshire series + possible workshop: networking the
Barsetshire series discussion and outline: Alli and Geoff; close
reading: Sophie; criticism summary: Emily; seminar paper: Sophie (from
last week); break: Alli

##### Markdown + Git with Nabil Kashyap

http://bulbil.github.io/

