# Great Expectations (first half)

### Understanding Criticism

#### *Narrated Monologue* - Deborah’s Literary Criticism of Dorrit
Cohn’s article What is a narrated monologue?

>  “[I]t subsequently is described as a “technique for rendering a
character’s thought in his own idiom while maintaining the third-person
reference and the basic tense of narration” – i.e. a technique that
transforms “figural thought-language into the narrative language of
third-person fiction” (100).

> “It is neither dualist nor monist; the narrated monologue blurs the
line for it is meant to “precisely reduce to the greatest possible
degree the hiatus between the narrator and the figure existing in all
third-person narration” (112). At the same time, it is important to keep
in mind that “the continued employment of third-person references
indicates, no matter how unobtrusively, the continued presence of a
narrator. And it is his *identification* – but not his *identity* – with
the character’s mentality that is supremely enhanced by this technique,”
(112).”

Can we identify what style of narration Trollope used in *Barchester
Towers*? It is not an exact example of *narrated monologue*, so what is
it?

>But let the gentle-hearted reader be under no apprehension whatsoever.
It is not destined that Eleanor shall marry Mr. Slope or Bertie
Stanhope. And here perhaps it may be allowed to the novelist to explain
his views on a very important point in the art of telling tales. He
ventures to reprobate that system which goes so far to violate all
proper confidence between the author and his readers by maintaining
nearly to the end of the third volume a mystery as to the fate of their
favourite personage. Nay, more, and worse than this, is too frequently
done. Have not often the profoundest efforts of genius been used to
baffle the aspirations of the reader, to raise false hopes and false
fears, and to give rise to expectations which are never to be realized?
Are not promises all but made of delightful horrors, in lieu of which
the writer produces nothing but most commonplace realities in his final
chapter? And is there not a species of deceit in this to which the
honesty of the present age should lend no countenance?” (p. 126-7)

>It is hardly necessary that I should give the public any lengthened
biography of Mr. Harding, up to the period of the commencement of this
tale. The public cannot have forgotten how ill that sensible gentleman
bore the attack that was made on him in the columns of the *Jupiter*
[...] Nor can it yet be forgotten that a law-suit was instituted against
him [...] (in chapter 2, find page number) What voices can we identify
in *Barchester Towers*? How does one voice transition to another? How
does this shape our impression of the narrator, the author, and the
characters?

#### Using Bakhtin to Understand the Voices in *Great Expectations*

> The novel as a whole is a phenomenon multiform in style and variform
in speech and voice. p.261

> But the primary source of language usage in the comic novel is a
highly specific treatment of “common language. p. 301

> What we are calling a hybrid construction is an utterance that
belongs, by its grammatical (syntactic) and compositional markers, to a
single speaker, but that actually contains mixed within it two
utterances, two speech manners, two styles, two “languages,” two
semantic and axiological belief systems. p. 304

> Heteroglossia, once incorporated into the novel (whatever the forms
for its incorporation), is *another’s speech in another’s language*,
serving to express authorial intentions but in a refracted way. p. 324

>> Incorporated into the novel are a multiplicity of “language” and
verbal ideological belief systems… but these languages are, it is true,
kept primarily within the limits of the literary written and
conversational language; at the same time these languages are not, in
most cases, consolidated into fixed persons… but rather are incorporated
in an impersonal form “from the author,” alternating… with direct
authorial discourse.

>> The incorporated languages and socio-ideological belief systems,
while of course utilized to refract the author’s intentions, are
unmasked and destroyed as something false, hypocritical, greedy,
limited, narrowly rationalistic, inadequate to reality.

Is *Great Expectations* a comic novel? Does it fit into the framework
provided by Bakhtin in his article? > Although Bahktin wrote his essays
over a hundred years after Dickens’s literary career ended, the latter’s
manipulation of the various social discourses in his novel seems to
function in the way Bahktin describes, and therefore “Discourse on the
Novel” might not be an inappropriate lens to use when considering
Dickens’s literary projects. This inquiry will perhaps help us explore
the genre of Dickens’s tale as (a potentially parody of) the
Bildungsroman or coming-of-age story. p. 1 --- Alli’s Seminar Paper

### Narration Style in Dickens

What type of narration is present in Great Expectations?

#### Alli’s Seminar Paper - Pip’s Bildungsroman: A “Becoming” of
Narrative Consciousness

Alli will explain her seminar paper at this point.

> To five little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long,
which were arranged in a neat row beside their grave, and were sacred to
the memory of the five little brothers of mine – who gave up trying to
get a living, exceedingly early in that universal struggle – I am
indebted for a belief I religiously entertained that they had all been
born on their backs with their hands in their trouser-pockets, and had
never taken them out in this state of existence. p. 3

> Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have often thought
that few people know what secrecy there is in the young, under terror. I
was in mortal terror of the young man who wanted my heart and liver; I
was in mortal terror of myself, from whom an awful promise had been
extracted; I had no hope of deliverance through my all-powerful sister,
who repulsed me at every turn; I am afraid to think of what I might have
done, on requirement, in the secrecy of my terror. p. 15

What voices can we identify here? Alli suggests that there is an old-Pip
narrator, a young-Pip narrator, and, at points, Dickens voice coming
through Pip’s narration.

> In the case of Great Expectations, the manipulation of different
discourses to suit authorial intentions seems to occur on three levels:
the author’s (Dickens), the ostensible narrator’s (present-Pip) – and
within the developing consciousness of past-Pip, the child. p. 1 -
Alli’s Seminar Paper

> I believe Dickens, one voice behind our narrator, also makes his
presence felt in this passage. The segment of the above sentence marked
with dashes –“who gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in
that universal struggle”– is undoubtedly the narrator’s speech; however,
it isn’t borrowing any ideas or terminology from past-Pip, but is rather
more reflective of an older Pip’s obsession with earning a living. While
the segment is no doubt sardonic, I believe it makes more sense to read
it as the narrator’s language – marked as different both by its subject
and register and by its physical demarcation on the page – but intended
by him as relatively straight commentary. p. 3

How does one voice transition into another? How is old-Pip distinguished
from young-Pip? Are we really hearing young-Pip at all, or something
else?

#### Consciousness of Language in *Great Expectations* --- Continuing
with Alli’s Paper

> Galbraith, who analyzes Chapter I by breaking it into three,
three-paragraph sections, argues that the narrator’s attitude towards
past-Pip as he explains his mistaken readings of the tombstones is
unsympathetic, pointing to his intrusive statements qualifying
past-Pip’s perceptions, like his “unreasonably derived” fancies, his
“odd idea,” and “childish conclusion.” However, while these qualifiers
serve to underscore past-Pip’s naivety, they also distance the
present-Pip from his past illiterate self. p. 2

> Pip’s misreading of his family’s tombstones in Chapter I is later
given cause in his education: it’s not so much that Pip is a naive
reader, I would argue, but that he’s been brought up in a specific
discourse and hasn’t yet recognized its limitations. p. 3

> Pip is unable to shift and adapt his language-based lenses of reality
– he has not quite learned to move between discourse in the same way
that Bahktin’s English comic novelist has. p. 5

Is Pip conscious of the different languages found in this novel?

> One night, I was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate,
expending great effort on the production of a letter to Joe. I think it
must have been a full year after our hunt upon the marshes, for it was a
long time after, and it was winter and a hard frost. With an alphabet on
the hearth at my feet for reference, I contrived in an hour or two to
print and smear this epistle:

>‘MI DEER JO i OPE U R KRWITE WELL i OPE i SHAL SON B HABELL 4 2 TEEDGE
U JO AN THEN WE SHORL B SO GLODD AN WEN i M PRENGTD 2 U JO WOT LARX AN
BLEVE ME INF XN PIP.’

> There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with Joe by
letter, inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone. But, I delivered
this written communication (slate and all) with my own hand, and Joe
received it as a miracle of erudition.

> ‘I say, Pip, old chap!’ cried Joe, opening his blue eyes wide, ‘what a
scholar you are! An’t you?’

> ‘I should like to be,’ said I, glancing at the slate as he held it:
with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly.

> ‘Why, here’s a J,’ said Joe, ‘and a O equal to anythink! Here’s a J
and a O, Pip, and a J-O, Joe.’ p. 45 Is present- or past-Pip conscious
of the different narrative styles? Why does Pip choose to communicate
with Joe in writing? Could this reflect a degree of narrative linguistic
consciousness?

> “No, I am ignorant and backward, Joe.”

> “Why, see what a letter you wrote last night! Wrote in print even!
I’ve seen letters - ah! and from gentlefolks! - that I’ll swear weren’t
wrote in print,” said Joe.”

> “I have learnt next to nothing, Joe. You think much of me. It’s only
that.” p. 71 (end of chapter IX)

Is Joe unconscious of the different forms of language? Or is he
conscious? Does he differ in any respect from Pip on this topic?

> “I don’t know what possessed me, Joe,” I replied, letting his shirt
sleeve go, and sitting down in the ashes at his feet, hanging my head;
“but I wish you hadn’t taught me to call Knaves at cards, Jacks; and I
wish my boots weren’t so thick nor my hands so coarse.”

> And then I told Joe that I felt very miserable, and that I hadn’t been
able to explain myself to Mrs. Joe and Pumblechook who were so rude to
me, and that there had been a beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s
who was dreadfully proud, and that she had said I was common, and that I
knew I was common, and that I wished I was not common, and that the lies
had come of it somehow, though I didn’t know how. p. 70 (end of chapter
IX)

Are we seeing past-Pip becoming conscious of how different forms of
language denote class?

Why does Pip lie to his family? Can we answer his question? Does he make
Miss Havisham’s house appear more fantastical than it is to
differentiate himself from his family? To differentiate himself from the
Havishams? For another reason altogether?

> “It was very aggravating; but, throughout the interview, Joe persisted
in addressing me instead of Miss Havisham.” (beginning of chapter XIII)
What does this mean? Does this express a conscious or an unconscious
understanding of language as an indication social class? What does it
mean that Pip is so bothered by Joe only addressing him?

### Emily’s Close Reading

>  I want to focus specifically on parallels and unnatural comparisons
in the passage. I believe that Dickens uses these parallels to
deconstruct Miss Havisham and present her as a series of loosely
connected parts. Pip struggles to understand the different parts as well
as the whole of Miss Havisham, which I would suggest relates to his fear
of the unnatural and death.

> Ordinarily, a “bride” would not have time to “wither” since she is not
a bride for the rest of her life. Equally, a “bridal dress” is
ordinarily worn only on one’s wedding day, and as such would not be worn
long enough to “wither” along with its wearer. While Pip can see that
the bride, the dress, and the flowers have all become “shrivelled,” he
creates tension within this simile since this is an unnatural, if apt,
comparison.

> While the waxwork and skeleton come to more obviously represent Miss
Havisham, she is still not referred to by name and she is described
using two separate entities. The absence of Miss Havisham’s name could
come from Pip’s inability to understand “Miss Havisham” as a logical,
unified concept. He sees her as disjointed but related parts. In Pip’s
mind, at first sight, she is understood as a series of contradictions,
with are in tension with each other in various ways. She is unnatural as
one person and consists of unnatural components, which unravels the idea
of her as an ordinary character. She cannot be classified either as a
whole or in terms of her parts, since neither makes complete sense to
Pip.

Are there other moments where this type of tension exists? Does it have
a similar source? How can we understand Dickens’s use of Gothic tropes?
Does this affect our understanding of *Great Expectations* as a realist
novel?

### Research Practices

#### The Significance of Studying Research Practices - Simon Reader

> How does the publication of previously unpublished materials (both
online and in print) affect our critical methods and approaches to
teaching the work of nineteenth century writers? How can Victorianists
think more broadly about the aesthetics of information? p. 1-2

> [W]e have an opportunity to expand our sense of how information and
research gets transmuted into cultural products. p. 3

> The opportunity here is not necessarily to devise new methodologies
that can be codified and transmitted to students, but rather to consider
the resemblance that method bears to style. p. 4

#### Butt and Tillotson “Dickens at Work”

Exercise on note-taking. If Dickens was required to add “fluff” material
by his editors because a segment of the serial was deemed to be too
short, what implications does this have for Barthes’ “reality effect”?
How can we use records of research practices to think about how to
restore serialized novels for publication in an ordinary book format? Do
you use the uncut or originally published version? Does it matter? To
what extent is an editor a collaborator? What is the extent of their
contributions to a serialized novel?

http://www.djo.org.uk/ - copies of *All the Year Round* -- spend some
time looking at journals and discussing

https://www.academia.edu/5011463/Victorian_Notebooks_Source_and_Method -
why understanding research practices of authors is significant to the
study of literature

http://dickensnotes.com/ - work-in-progress site illustrating how
Dickens’s notes and note-taking practices translated into his published
work

### Workshop - extracting character names from *The Barsetshire
Chronicles*

