# *Hard Cash* (first half)

## 1. Overflow from last week

### Emily’s Close Reading

> “The sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, through
the glittering drops of rain upon the glass, and it made a broad shaft
of light between the two-­and-­thirty and the Judge, linking both
together, and perhaps reminding some among the audience, how both were
passing on, with absolute equality, to the greater Judgment that knoweth
all things and cannot err. Rising for a moment, a distinct speck of face
in this way of light, the prisoner said, ‘My Lord, I have received my
sentence of Death from the Almighty, but I bow to yours,’ and sat down
again. There was some hushing, and the Judge went on with what he had to
say to the rest. Then, they were all formally doomed, and some of them
were supported out, and some of them sauntered out with a haggard look
of bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery, and two or three shook
hands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herb they had taken
from the sweet herbs lying about. He went last of all, because of having
to be helped from his chair and to go very slowly; and he held my hand
while the others were removed, and while the audience got up (putting
their dresses right, as they might at church or elsewhere) and pointed
down at this criminal or that, and most of all at him and me.” p. 458 ­
Volume 3, Chapter 17 /­ Chapter 56

. > He is attempting to reveal the presence and structure of
disciplinary power by juxtaposing the cruelty of the audience with the
humanity of the convicted, but does not give his characters (or his
readers) viable options to subvert this power.

. > In a sense, Dickens creates a stage for the condemned and a
“gallery” for the audience. He implies a social-­physical divide between
the two groups when he states, “the audience… pointed down at this
criminal or that.” ...This language is flippant, which implies that the
audience sees no higher stake in this sentencing than they would any
other performance. The spectacle is “petty”, no different than “church
or elsewhere”, which masks their coercive power.

. >Throughout the novel, characters feel as though they are being
watched and are wracked with terror that their wrongdoing will be
discovered. As in the panopticon, they feel as though they are under
constant surveillance even though they cannot say for certain that
someone is watching them.



+ Can we compare this scene with that of Mr. Wopsle’s earlier in the
novel?

+ Different ways of challenging the reader and the audience of
information/narrative?

. > Dickens treats light as a symbol of a divine presence and pending
justice. Pip says that a “broad shaft of light” “links” the judge and
the condemned together. He says that this serves to “remind” the
audience that there is no significant difference between the judge and
the condemned because they would be judged with “absolute equality”
after they pass on. He invokes Biblical language, saying that everyone
will meet “greater Judgment that knoweth all things and cannot err.” It
is all­knowing, all­powerful, and perfectly just. The current
proceedings are distinct from this greater justice. Magwitch tells the
judge, “My lord, I have received a sentence of Death from the Almighty,
but I bow to yours.” “[T]he Almighty” has sentenced Magwitch to “Death”
just as He has sentenced everyone to death. Magwitch views God’s
“sentence” as distinct from the judge’s sentence. He “bows” to the
judge’s sentence not only because it is backed by law, but because it
happens to align with God’s plan. This is not to suggest that the
judge’s sentence is just. Divine justice is only possible after death
and there is no guarantee that this will occur. Magwitch is portrayed as
a “distinct speck of face” in “the way” of the divine “light.” This
suggests that Magwitch, while standing in the light, blocks some of it
from reaching the judge. The judge is “reminded” of divine justice, but
does not have to face it and does not have to consider a greater justice
in reaching his decisions. The light could also be seen to form a halo
around Magwitch, implying a sort of divine blessing. Justice can only be
achieved after death, not during life.

+ Can we think about judgment & light on other characters? Miss
Havisham? Pip?

## 2. Discovering Reade ### Poovey article - Alli’s criticism summary
>Mary Poovey suggests that the solidification of literary criticism as a
discipline introduced new measures of valuing realism at the end of the
19th century which necessarily excluded authors like Charles Reade from
the English literary canon.

. >As novels came to be valued by critics for offering escape from a
chaotic world of everyday life, they became associated with a language
of stylistics that necessarily distinguished itself from the language of
the public; therefore, books could no longer be valued by the public
opinion that Victorian novelists appealed to in their fiction.

. >The combination of variables meant that determining the value of a
given work was frequently left to the public, which is why authors
appealed so often to public opinion in their prefatory materials and
texts. However, by the late-19th century, critics were beginning to
distinguish between a novel’s market value and literary value out of an
increasing desire to define the novel as an aesthetic, rather than a
commercial, production. This debate was shaped by the juxtaposition of
“realism” and “idealism” as different techniques for rendering truth, as
well as different conceptions as to the effect that literature was
supposed to produce in its readers.

. >Thus, advocating for a new artistic or stylistic mode of appreciating
the novel-as-art was also a self-interested way to carve out a niche for
the professional or specialized critic. Only those trained in the
language of criticism could claim to evaluate literature’s value, thus
cutting out the public – and Reade – entirely.

#### Connections with Trollope (from Alli’s criticism)

>Trollope also mentions that he believes novels, with their ordinary
characters, have an ability to teach the reading public moral lessons.
Reade, meanwhile, sees his chief motive in writing fiction as spurring
reform. Is there anything we can say about shared perceptions of
subjectivity in the Victorian world, that universal sentimental or moral
truths are arguably those which aren’t rooted in fact, whereas those
which seek to relay institutional or societal truths need (in Reade’s
opinion) grounding in fact/the “particular”?

. >I’m also wondering, when we think about genre and reading practices,
how Victorian readers encountered and experienced Reade’s fiction, which
was hugely popular at the time. Freedgood last week suggested that
realism was understood to be smooth and coherent – does this expectation
arise out of this moment, making it anachronistic to project onto
earlier Victorian readers? If Victorian readers have been trained in the
type of reading that Freedgood describes (essentially, “smart” readers
of the reality effect who realize that not every detail has inherent
meaning), how would they have experienced Reade’s fiction? Does his
novel seem to necessitate a different reading practice? And how do we
situate his claims to reality within a genre started by Scott, whose
footnoting was sometimes-serious, sometimes-intertextual, and sometimes
downright farcical?

+To help us think about this, here are images of [all of the footnotes
in Hard
Cash](https://courses.swarthmore.edu/spring2013/engl111/2013/03/18/
footnotes-in-reades-hard-cash-sierras-booknotes/) collected by Sierra
Eckert for the [Victorian Novel Reserach Seminar
2013](https://courses.swarthmore.edu/spring2013/engl111/)


### Our Barsetshire project
[Link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ojbnO-ecNRptJpsUf74e9g1-
_dMyVDZAH2QN1nfYOSY/edit) to Barsetshire initial document

+ the final paragraph of *The Last Chronicle of Barset* > And now, if
the reader will allow me to seize him affectionately by the arm, we will
together take our last farewell of Barset and of the towers of
Barchester. I may not venture to say to him that, in this country, he
and I together have wandered often through the country lanes, and have
ridden together over the too-well wooded fields, or have stood together
in the cathedral nave listening to the peals of the organ, or have
together sat at good men's tables, or have confronted together the angry
pride of men who were not good. I may not boast that any beside myself
have so realized the place, and the people, and the facts, as to make
such reminiscences possible as those which I should attempt to evoke by
an appeal to perfect fellowship. But to me Barset has been a real
county, and its city a real city, and the spires and towers have been
before my eyes, and the voices of the people are known to my ears, and
the pavement of the city ways are familiar to my footsteps. To them all
I now say farewell. That I have been induced to wander among them too
long by my love of old friendships, and by the sweetness of old faces,
is a fault for which I may perhaps be more readily forgiven, when I
repeat, with some solemnity of assurance, the promise made in my title,
that this shall be the last chronicle of Barset.

+final paragraph of AnthonyTrollope’s *Autobiography* >Now I stretch out
my hand, and from the further shore I bid adieu to all who have cared to
read any among the many words that I have written.

+just for comparison, final paragraph from Margaret Oliphant’s
*Autobiography*: And now here I am all alone I cannot write anymore.


## **break**


### Discourse & Gender - Geoff’s Seminar Paper & Close Reading > His
sister Julia was not so easy to describe. Her figure was tall, lithe,
and serpentine; her hair the colour of a horse­chesnut fresh from its
pod; her ears tiny and shell­like, her eyelashes long and silky; her
mouth small when grave, large when smiling; her eyes pure hazel by day,
and tinged with a little violet by night. But in jotting down these
details, true as they are, I seem to myself to be painting fire, with a
little snow and saffron mixed on a marble pallet. There is a beauty too
spiritual to be chained in a string of items; and Julia’s fair features
were but the china vessel that brimmed over with higher loveliness of
her soul. Her essential charm was, what shall I say? Transparence.
Modesty, Intelligence, and, above all, Enthusiasm, shone through her,
and out of her, and made her an airy, fiery, household joy. Briefly, an
incarnate beam (34). . >Dr. Short looked a little surprised; his female
patients rarely contradicted him. Was it for them to disown things he
was so good as to assign them? “Ah!” said he, “you are not conscious of
it” (​62).

> Thus, Reade introduces the idea that language — while capable of
capturing the concrete, practical characteristics of men — cannot be
used in the same manner for youthful female character description. While
Mrs. Dodd’s introduction does not express as much anxiety on the part of
the narrator, Reade focuses on her matronly tendencies, a thematic
description that cannot be used for Julia.

. > I think Julia’s “revelation,” and subsequent regression is an
excellent example of heteroglossia in Hard Cash. In these two quotes,
Julia introduces two separate and distinct notions of female
sensibility. The first is the more progressive notion that women have
equal potential for intellectual growth, as long as they have a choice
in what they want to pursue; the second being the conventional
configuration of women as easily upset and hyperemotional. That Reade
describes her declaration as a “revelation” implies his belief in the
truthfulness of the statement, introducing his own ideas into the
passage and adding to the voices present in this brief passage.

. > Reade uses this language to mock the confounding performance of the
medical men while also underscoring the truth­seeking nature of Mrs.
Dodd and Julia, who desperately want the men to speak to them in
practical, “popular terms.”

. > Language serves the patriarchy in that it silences women, ultimately
harming them (or at least wasting their time). While Dr. Sampson
critiques other healers’ uses of language, he uses language to serve his
own purpose: to relate his own theory of medicine— in short, telling the
women the truths they cannot figure out on their own… Thus, Reade uses
heteroglossia and language in Hard Cash in order to examine and critique
patriarchy in Victorian England.

. > Comparing this to the narrator’s description of Edward’s athletic
ability and craftsmanship gives the reader a clear example of Reade’s
framework of gender; men are described by what they do, women are
described by what they mean. Therefore it is no surprise that Reade
borders on the edge of allegory in his description, as “Modesty,
Intelligence, and, above all, Enthusiasm” shine through Julia. His
initial description of Julia (again, more abstract than Edward’s) is not
sufficient for Reade: “But in jotting down these details, true as they
are, I seem to myself to be painting fire, with a little snow and
saffron mixed on a marble pallet.” (This preoccupation with character
portraiture should remind us of Trollope, and I am interested to hear
what the seminar thinks are the differences between the two and their
ideas of character construction)...

. > When Julia disrupts his interpretation, he views her as ungrateful
for the meaning he has given to her. Instead of admitting his
interpretation is wrong, he tells her that she “is not conscious of it”;
or, in other words, that she cannot interpret her own body. It is his
position, as a man of knowledge, to assign the ultimate meaning, even
when the Julia argues against him.

. Think about the moment that Julia asks her mother to consult a female
physician (Chapter III) Is Mrs. Dodd merely a conservative character? Is
she being ironic? How do we interpret her response given the imbecility
of the doctors? What does it mean that Mr. Sampson’s language is
difficult to read? What was reason behind giving him a dialect? He,
however, does use smaller and simpler words than the other doctors. Is
his simplicity obscured by his dialect? Also, think about “Blest with an
oracle irrelevantly fluent, and dumb to the point, she had asked him to
dinner with maternal address.” (Chapter IV) Speaking of different kinds
of language: what do we make of the “translations” of the prescriptions?
Why is the latin given at all? And what is up with “[Greek text]”? Is
that a quirk of the Gutenberg Project or was that in the original
publication? We would also like to discuss more fully description in
*Hard Cash*. We would also like to compare Reade’s use of description to
both Trollope’s and Dickens’. It might also be useful to think about
Lukacs article.

### Theories and Race + chapter 11: Fullalove on “The African Theory” +
chapter 4: Dr. Sampson on medicine - “The great Chronothairmal Therey o’
Medicine, th’ Unity Perriodicity an’ Remittency of all diesease” + in
addition to gender and language - touched upon in Geoff's work

### Insanity and Female Hysteria? - Sophie’s Close Reading > “This news
put Alfred in a phrensy of indignation and fear. Julia dancing the
cachouka! Julia a jolly girl! Julia singing songs pathetic or merry,
whichever were asked for! The heartless one! He called to mind all he
had read in the classics, and elsewhere, about the fickleness of woman.
But this impressions did not last long; he recalled Julia’s character,
and all the signs of a love tender and true she had given him. He read
her by himself, and, lover-like, laid all the blame on another. It was
all her cold-blooded mother. ‘Fool that I have been. I see it all now.
She appeals to my delicacy to keep away; then she goes to Julia and
says, ‘See, he deserts you at a word from his father. Be proud, be gay!
He never loved you; marry another.’ The shallow plotter forgets that
whoever she does marry I’ll kill. How many unsuspicious girls have these
double-faced mothers deluded so? They do it in half the novels,
especially in those written by women; and why? because these know know
the perfidy and mendacity of their sex better than we do; they see them
nearer, and with their souls undrest. War, Mrs. Dodd! war to the death!
From this moment I am alone in the world with her. I have no friend but
Alfred Hardie: and my bitterest enemies are my cold-blooded father and
her cold-blooded mother.’” (Chapter VI)

. > FUN FACTS: According to Wikipedia: “Hysteria of both genders was
widely discussed in the medical literature of the nineteenth century.
Women considered to be suffering from it exhibited a wide array of
symptoms, including faintness, nervousness, sexual desire, insomnia,
fluid retention, heaviness in the abdomen, muscle spasm, shortness of
breath, irritability, loss of appetite for food or sex, and "a tendency
to cause trouble”. In extreme cases, the woman might be forced to enter
an insane asylum or to undergo surgical hysterectomy.” “A physician in
1859 claimed that a quarter of all women suffered from hysteria. George
Beard, a physician, catalogued seventy-five pages of possible symptoms
of hysteria and called the list incomplete; almost any ailment could fit
the diagnosis.”

. > In Chapter IV, Mr. Osmond tells Mrs. Dodd that Julia suffers from
“Hyperaesthesia”, or “excessive sensibility.” The symptoms of this
disorder seem to subtly imply that it is seen by some of the characters
as a mild form of insanity. (18) Insanity comes up once again, this time
much more explicitly, after Captain Dodd’s attack of apoplexy. Dr.
Sampson tells Mr. Hardie in Chapter XXIV that Captain Dodd is now “a
maniac” and is “gone to a private asylum.” (114) Insanity rears its ugly
head again and is discussed at great length in Chapter XXV. It is in
this chapter that a discussion occurs between Mr. Osmond, Dr. Wycherley,
and Mr. Hardie concerning the possibility that Alfred’s symptoms suggest
“the Incubation of Insanity.” (116)

. > Of particular interest, is the fact that Alfred describes both his
father and Julia’s mother as “cold-blooded.” They are his “bitterest
enemies” and set up to be diametrically opposed to him because they are
prohibiting him from being with Julia. If they are “cold-blooded” it
would not be far-fetched to assume that Alfred is “hot-blooded.”
Insanity is closely tied to the passions, and these are tied to
“warmbloodedness”.

. >  He reiterates the two women’s distinct roles when he says “How many
unsuspicious girls have these doublefaced mothers deluded so?” It is
also at this moment when Alfred says to himself “They do it in half the
novels, especially in those written by women; and why? because these
know know the perfidy and mendacity of their sex better than we do; they
see them nearer, and with their souls undrest.”

. > Hard Cash was published in 1863 and the craze of “female hysteria”
were at an all time high in the nineteenth century. I cannot help but
wonder - given the little bit that I know about the symptoms associated
with female hysteria - if Charles Reade was in some way referencing this
“disease” in his novel. Was this the fear that led Mrs. Dodd to consult
so many doctors on her daughter’s behalf? Julia is described as having
“excessive sensibility”. Her mother is coldblooded. I cannot quite
figure out why this seems so important to me, but I think that it has
something to do with the fact that Julia is a virgin and Mrs. Dodd is
not.

. Look at the punctuation in the above passage. Think about narrated
monologue. Does this affect Reade’s writing mission and his desire for
social reform? “There is a fascinating age when an intelligent girl is
said to fluctuate between childhood and womanhood.” (Chapter IV) Does
this account for the various difference between Mrs. Dodd and Julia? Is
Mrs. Dodd different because she is a mother/wife? “This one did not
trouble the doctors; he glowed with a steady fire; no heats and chills,
and sad misgivings; for one thing he was not a woman, a being tied to
that stake, Suspense, and compelled to wait and wait for others’
actions.” (Chapter III)

### Reade Notecards Introduction

>As far as is known there are something like 180 manuscript notecards
for all of Reade’s novels, but more of them concern *Hard Cash* than any
one of the other novels. This is the primary reason why the notecards
for *Hard Cash* were chosen for study. In addition this novel is
generally accepted as the best example of Reade’s documentary and
sensation writing. Like *It’s Never Too Late To Mend* and *Put Yourself
In His Place*, *Hard Cash* is reformistic, overwhelmingly dramatic,
filled with incident odd and violent, and dependent upon contemporary
and verifiable fact. (page ii)

. >One hundred years later the facts have assumed a place more
consistent with their importance and it is possible to inspect Reade’s
herculean efforts not to test the accuracy of the facts but to see if
and how there facts from the notecards were used in the writing of one
documentary novel, *Hard Cash*. (page x)

. >It was discovered that Reade used the notecards in three ways: he
accepted brief passages unchanged for the novel; he accepted passages
but revised the wording before placing it in the novel; he used the
notecard material as suggestion for a scene, a passage, or a larger
general movement of plot. (page xi)

. Are there any cards in particular that we should look at? (Rachel will
pull some up.)

### A Terrible Temptation by Charles Reade

Show image of Reade’s study.

>So far the room was romantic; but there was a prosaic corner to shock
those who fancy that fiction is the spontaneous overflow of a poetic
fountain fed by nature only; between the fireplace and the window, and
within a foot or two of the wall, stood a gigantic writing-table, with
the signs of hard labor on it, and of severe system.

. >He was writing a novel based on facts; facts, incidents, living
dialogue, pictures, reflections, situations, were all on these cards to
choose from, and arranged in headed columns: and some portions of the
work he was writing on the basis of imagination and drudgery lay on the
table in two forms, his own writing, and his secretary’s copy thereof,
the latter corrected for press.

+ Rachel talks about Reade’s research practices

### TBC: Too Much To Know - Ann M. Blair toss up? depending on time &
interest; Rachel can talk a bit here or previously about Reade in the
context of the history of note-taking and knowledge organization

###Talk briefly about open notebooks

**returning graded papers**

## February 23: personal knowledge base some topics: social problem
novel, prison, asylum, investigative journalism; index, database vs
[personal knowledge
base](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_knowledge_base); Charles
Reade’s open research notebook; returning to canon questions

+ Charles Reade, *Hard Cash*, first half + Charles Reade’s notecards +
description of fictional novelist-researcher Rolfe from A Terrible
Temptation + Ann Blair, “Note-taking as Information Management” from
*Too Much to Know** + Mary Poovey, “Forgotten Writers, Neglected
Histories”* Alli + workshop preparation: begin thinking about open
notebooks; see [add links] - tech examples: outliners, Github, +
workshop: open notebook; choose one “open” practice in addition to your
tagged Zotero

discussion and outline: Deb and Sophie; close reading: Geoff and Sophie;
criticism summary: Alli; seminar paper: Geoff; break: Emily




