#Discussion Outline March 16

##“The Reality Effect” 

####Sophie’s Criticism Summary 

> We concluded that his essay suggests that some objects seem to have no symbolic
meaning and are usually passed over by readers as being merely
insignificant details. Barthes thinks, however, that these objects
and/or details do, in fact, have a purpose. They are there to give
readers the impression that the world described in the novel is the real
world. They are there to proclaim to readers “This is reality!” Barthes
appears to believe that one of the goals of the realist novel was to
make readers think that the fiction was reality and the “reality-effect”
is the manner in which this illusion is accomplished. Details that
cannot easily be assigned a narrative or symbolic significance instead,
in Barthes view at least, pretend to index the real world. This becomes
slightly problematic when we try to establish what details are or are
not significant. For instance, what is significant for some readers may
not be significant for others. I also discussed this point at greater
length in my seminar paper on Barchester Towers. “How are we to decide
what is or is not essential to the narrative? If essential to the
narrative means necessary to explain the human actions which follow, we
must start with the admission that human motives defy any reductionist
approach. No one can say with specificity exactly what combination of
prior elements led to subsequent action.” We can, in fact, only
retrospectively give significance.

+ To borrow from Sophie’s Seminar Paper:  “The novel seems, at first, to
be an almost exhaustive list of insignificant details on a variety of
subjects. Is it enough to say that they all simply signify reality or is
there more to their inclusion?”

#### Looking At the Inclusion of Facts --- Researching the Duke of Angouleme 

> The librarian brought them general histories and pamphlets,
along with a color lithograph depicting, in three-quarter view, His
Lordship the Duke of Angouleme. The blue fabric of his uniform
disappeared beneath his epaulettes, decorations, and the fat red sash of
the Legion of Honor. An exceedingly high collar encased his long neck.
His pear-shaped head was framed by curly hair and narrow sideburns;
heavy eyelids, a rather large nose, and thick lips gave his face an
expression of insipid goodness. p. 109

> As they were about to leave, the librarian, on second thought, showed
them another portrait of the Duke of Angouleme. In this one, he was
dressed as a colonel in the armored cavalry, in profile, his eye even
smaller, mouth open, with straight, fluttering hair. How could they
reconcile the two portraits? Was his hair straight or curly -- unless he
had pushed vanity to the point of having it curled? A serious question,
according to Pecuchet, for an individual’s hair is an expression of his
inner nature. Bouvard claimed that one cannot truly know a man without
knowing his passions. And to clarify these two points, they paid a visit
to the Faverges chateau. p. 112

+ In most of the novels we’ve read, the description of the painting
would be, for Barthes, insignificant. It would only signal to us that
the painting is “real”. However, these details become significant, at
least to Bouvard and Pecuchet, a few pages later. What can we make of
this shift in significance? Does the significance shift at all? Does the
detail of the hair in the painting remain insignificant while the
contradiction between the two paintings achieves significance? + What
does this contradiction mean in light of what this novel is poking fun
of here? Bouvard and Pecuchet assign a large amount of significance to
the curliness or straightness of the Duke’s hair and the reader finds
this ridiculous. Is Flaubert trying to reveal a gap between the “real”
in a novel, the “real” in theoretical, artistic, and historical sources,
and what is truly “real”?

#### Sturrock, “How Stupid People Are” --- Unpacking the Humor in *Bouvard et Pecuchet* 

>What makes Bouvard et Pécuchet at once more
approachable and also more curious than the Tentation or Salammbô is
that on this occasion, instead of simply drawing on his sources silently
in the normal way, Flaubert gives some of them at least an actual
presence in the text, where Messrs B. and P. are made to turn, for the
botanical, chemical, archaeological and other assorted knowledges that
they believe will profit them, to the same literature in whose company
their author had spent so many months. Yet far from profiting from this
new knowledge, the two hopefuls find everything practical that they
attempt on the strength of it going farcically wrong: the melons they
grow in their horticultural phase taste like pumpkins, the liqueur they
distil in the cellar explodes, their self-medication makes them ill, and
so on. And when, later, they move up from more or less scientific
experiments to start dabbling in the humanities, developing tastes and
ambitions in literature, education, even politics, we can be sure in
advance that every idea they take up will be one that Flaubert had long
found either laughable or pernicious. B. and P. are given no quarter:
from the start to the finish of their story, they are being played by
their author for a pair of suckers.

>And that is why the book is so curious, because he can’t play them for
suckers without at the same time seeming to play himself for one. Can he
have waded – complainingly: see his correspondence over the months of
preparation – through all those hundreds of books simply to show what he
described as ‘two rather lucid, mediocre and simple souls’ being led
astray? He could have done that on a tenth the amount of background
reading. As it is, it looks as though he has deliberately misused his
own time in order to show his, as it turns out, insufficiently lucid
simpletons misusing theirs: as though the successive pratfalls that they
are asked to take in the course of the book are so many opportunities
for Flaubert to draw attention to his unusual capacity for suffering in
the service of a transcendent Art. No wonder he told George Sand as he
set out on the novel that it would be the modern ‘counterpart’ of Saint
Antoine (the final version of which he had just sent off to the
publisher). He is reverting in Bouvard et Pécuchet to the role of St
Anthony, with the prolonged ascesis of the book’s gestation finding its
reward in the encyclopedic range of the contents and in the
particularity with which Flaubert is able to mock the efforts of his two
boobies, along with the whole way of life of the society they live
among.

+ We know that Flaubert did huge amounts of research in order to write
this novel, just as his characters do in the novel. Did Flaubert, as
Sturrock suggests, “deliberately misuse] his own time in order to show
his, as it turns out, insufficiently lucid simpletons misusing theirs”?
Is he trying to put himself in his characters’ shoes in order to portray
them realistically? Or is he doing something entirely different? Must
Flaubert understand his research to a greater degree than his characters
in order to show them humorously misinterpreting theories and facts? +
We also know that most of Flaubert’s research hit the cutting room
floor. Are there ways in which this research, while absent, informs the
text? Does it inform how we read and interpret the text?

[1:30]

###Alli’s Close Reading - Separating Character, the Narrator, and the Author (If At All Possible) 

> Few historians have followed these rules –
but always in the interests of a particular cause, religion, nation,
party, or system, or to discredit a king, sway the populace, or offer a
moral example

> The others, who claim merely to be relating the facts, are no better.
For it is impossible to say everything. One has to make choices. But
one’s selection of documents is guided by a certain viewpoint; and as
this viewpoint varies, depending on the writer’s situation, history will
never be a fixed entity.

> “That’s sad,” they thought. Still, one could take a subject, read all
the source materials, make an analysis – then condense it into a
narration, which would be like a summary of the facts, a reflection of
the whole truth. Such a project seemed feasible to Pecuchet. (108)

. > ...the first two paragraphs are in an intermediary place, between
the articulation of the postscript and an articulation of commentary
from Bouvard and Pecuchet. Our other alternative is to attribute these
paragraphs to the narrator/Flaubert – the consequence that follows is
that Bouchard and Pecuchet must have access to the narrator’s thoughts
in order to offer a meta-commentary on the text itself.

> A narration as summary of all researched facts, but also as a
condensed analysis, becomes “a reflection of the whole truth.” Whether
dismissing the first two paragraphs as they were processed in their
brains or presented by the author (or both, since the interpretive move
is for the reader to make), this paragraph seems to either imply the
necessity of “unknowing” the limitations of producing truth to reflect
the truth of the composition process itself – a reading that becomes
perhaps more likely if we view the first two paragraphs as somehow
representing the drawing of connections or processing of text in the
brains of Bouvard and Pecuchet – or else becomes indicative of
Pecuchet’s failure to grasp the analysis presented by the narrator, and
thus to understand the futility of his project to begin with.

>The problem of narration becomes a problem for understanding Flaubert’s
views – is he here identifying with Pecuchet, and is the first portion
of the final sentence his thoughts, which Pecuchet deems feasible? I
think this is the best reading – but then again, finding one truth might
be reading against the text

+ What are the implications of this passage having a multiplicity of
meanings, that is, if it is interpreted differently depending on who we
believe the passage should be attributed to? + Is there a core fact,
here? It appears, at first, that the central point of the passage is to
warn us against finding core facts, which seems contradictory. Can we,
like Flaubert, acknowledge a truth about human interaction with facts
and theories (that we can find no one true meaning)? Can we unpack the
paradox that the only truth is that there is no correct interpretation
of truth?

[2:00]

###Barthes, “The Preparation of the Novel -- Emily’s Criticism Summary 

>He defines two key problems he wishes to solve through his analysis.
First, he states that notation “appears at the problematic intersection
between a river of language… -- life, both a continuous, ongoing,
sequenced text and a layered text, a histology of cut-up texts, a
palimpset -- and a sacred gesture: to mark life” (p. 18). That is,
notation lies at the intersection of the present world and the literary.
As such, its properties and effects are difficult to assess. Second, he
asks,  “[H]ow to pass from Notation… to the Novel, from the
discontinuous to the flowing...? For me, the problem is psychostructural
because it involves making the transition from the fragment to the
nonfragment, which involves changing my relationship to enunciation,
which is to say the subject that I am” (p. 18). He asks, how does one
turn notes into a narrative? He marks this as specifically problematic
because the author’s relationship to each form is different -- their
attitude towards their work must change as the mechanics of their work
change.


> He believes writers undergo a different process when writing about the
past as opposed to the present. He says, “[A]ll memory is already
meaning. In reality, it’s not memory that creates (the Novel) but its
deformation” (p. 16). Authors who write about the past artistically
manipulate what is already meaningful. Barthes, however, believes he
cannot write about the past because his memory is not strong enough. He
must write about the present (p. 17). This process is more difficult
because the present has not already been selectively memorized. He has
to determine how to “reconcile… the distance implied by the enunciation
of writing and the proximity, the transportation of the present
experienced as it happens” (p. 17). He must “capture” the “parallel
text… of ‘contemporary’, concomitant life” (p. 17). The distance between
present experience and the written word is greater than the memorized,
already intellectualized past and the written word. In order to solve
this problem, he must think about how to connect notation (the process
which best captures the present in writing) with the novel, or how to go
from “notation (of the Present) to the novel, from a short, fragmented
form (‘notes’) to a long continuous form” (p. 23).

> In order to further study the transition from authorial notation to
the novel, Barthes looks at the haiku. He sees the haiku as a superior
method of notation. He says, “Haiku = exemplary form of the Notation of
the Present = minimal act of enunciation, ultrashort form, an atom of a
sentence that notes… a tiny element of “real”, present, concomitant
life” (p. 23). It best captures present reality, combining a “truth” “of
the Instant” with a “form” (p. 25). Barthes discusses how much of the
haiku is lost in translation. Since he cannot read Japanese and French
is linguistically different, he cannot tell how accurate the translation
is and must acknowledge that the meter and rhyme of the poem will
inevitably be lost. However, its form signifies truthfulness, even in
translation (p. 25-6). It presents “a single ideogram” that is
“unfettered by the superficial divisions of everyday discourse” (p. 26).

+ How can a form = truthfulness, according to Barthes? Does brevity =
truthfulness? Do we see any instances of haiku-like phrases and passages
in *Bouvard et Pécuchet*?

From Alli:

> Not about the haiku, but a few things I found interesting in
"Fictional Encyclopedism and the Cognitive Value of Literature"
(Swigger) that might be cool to think about, in terms of form/genre:

>main argument of paper (for context): "to propose to critics that lit
be studied in terms of its use of and aspirations toward knowledge, and
to propose that one way of orienting oneself to those problems is to
consider the ways in which encyclopedism continues to be an ambition of
lit."

>For Northrup Frye, encyclopedism is the place where criticism and
literature come together, according to Swigger: "Encyclopedism is a
symptom of literature's tendency to establish itself as a total order of
words, and order in which human beings tell themselves what they know
and understand about the universe." --> so basically, encyclopedism as a
refutation of/demonstration of literature's "claims" to create a
well-ordered whole ONLY out of that which is known(?)

>On B+P: "Each of their concerns develops out of earlier failures so
that, though the sequence may be according to nothing more systemic than
chance, the book as a whole does offer an organizational hierarchy of
the realism of knowledge [...] B=P have a knack, obviously related to
Flaubert's own scrupulosity, for penetrating to the very conceptual core
of whatever field they are studying, for finding the paradox, the
circular argument [...] usually ignored by practicing specialists. Thus
the inability of these two autodidacts to "find the rule" is F's means
if illustrating the shiftiness of the sands on which the culture of his
age was built."

> I just think the last quote in particular is interesting in thinking
about what Flaubert was critiquing, as well as how we'd read the project
of encyclopedism -- categorizing or organizing in the world into some
sort of understandable order -- both in the first 10 chapters and again
in his dictionaries

[2:30]

###Dictionary of Accepted Ideas

+ AMERICA: Perfect example of injustice: it was Columbus who discovered
it, but it is named for Amerigo Vespucci. If not for the discovery of
America, we wouldn’t have syphilis and Phylloxera. Praise it
nonetheless, especially if one has never been there. Lecture people
about self-government. 
+ ART: Leads to the poorhouse. What good is it,
since it is being replaced by mechanical processes that do the job
better and faster? + BOOK: No matter which one, always too long. 
+ CRUCIFIX: Looks good in an alcove and on the guillotine. 
+ DARWIN: The fellow who said we were descended from apes. 
+ DICTIONARY: Scoff at it—is only for ignoramuses. Rhyming dictionary: Use one? Disgraceful! 
+ DIPLOMA: Sign of knowledge. Doesn’t prove a thing. 
+ DOCTRINARIANS: Despise them. Why? No idea. 
+ ERA(ours): Thunder against it. Complain that isn’t poetic. Call it a period of transition or decadence 
+ FACE: Mirror of the soul. In which case, some people’s soul’s are mighty ugly
+ GRAMMAR: Teach it to children from their earliest years as being
something clear and easy. 
+ HYGIENE: Must always be maintained. Prevents illnesses, except when it causes them. 
+ IMAGINATION: Always vivid. Guard against it. When one has none, denigrate it in others. To
write novels, all you need is a little imagination. 
+ IMBECILES: Those who don’t think like you. 
+ NOVELS: Pervert the masses. Are less immoral in serial form than in volumes. Only historical novels can be
tolerated, because at least they teach history. Some novels are written
with the point of a scalpel; others rest on the tip of a needle. 
+ PATIENT: To make a patient feel better, laugh at his illness and deny
his suffering. 
+ POETRY: Is utterly useless. Out of fashion. 
+ PRINTED: One should believe everything that is printed. Seeing one’s name in
print! There are people who commit crimes solely for that reason.
+ SCIENCE: A little science leads you away from religion, a lot of it
brings you back. 
+ SERIAL NOVELS: Cause of demoralization. Argue about the probable outcome. Write to the author to suggest ideas. Fury at
finding a character with your name. 
+ SPELLING: Believe in it like geometry. Is not necessary when one has style. 
+ STOCK MARKET: Barometer of public opinion.

###Deborah’s Seminar Paper 

> Given the extent of resources Flaubert uses, however, this paper will focus on the “Dictionary of Accepted
Ideas” as a form of preparation discernable in the novel—particularly
the entry on “science” and how it appears in Bouvard and Pécuchet—and
will consider how Flaubert “transition[s] from the fragment to the
nonfragment,” “from the discontinuous to the flowing,” with “the
nonfragment” and “the flowing” being the novel, not reality from which
“the fragment” or “the discontinuous” emanates (Barthes 18).

> While Bouvard and Pécuchet find the project less feasible after
drafting an outline of a biography, Flaubert features what was lacking
in his characters’ efforts: the “affairs of the heart” (112). Just as
his protagonists discover, Flaubert demonstrates “that external facts
are not the whole story. You also need to factor in psychology. Without
imagination, history is flawed” (114). And while the “Dictionary of
Accepted Ideas” does not quite consist of facts, the entries are still
fragments that Flaubert anneals with psychology, with imagination to
produce the continuous flow that defines the Novel, and juxtaposes the
Novel with the “river of language” or “life.”

> It remains as in the “Dictionary of Accepted Ideas,” a “truism” left
to the reader’s interpretation, but challenges the reader’s
interpretation in a different context—not by virtue of existing as an
entry in the “Dictionary of Accepted Ideas,” but by the context of
Bouvard and Pécuchet’s characters and the plot... [F]or a reader aware
of the entry from the “Dictionary of Accepted Ideas,” the saying seems
to contribute to the “Reality Effect,” as described by Barthes in his
essay of the same name; while not wholly an insignificant, meaningless
detail, the saying does register or signify the real by existing in the
very real “Dictionary of Accepted Ideas.”

> In other words, the “layered text” to which Barthes refers seems to
imply various discourses that compose that river of language, of
reality. To produce “the continuous”, Flaubert embraces different
discourses and inserts his Notes into each. For instance, the language
of the old saying about “science” differs from that of Pécuchet and
Bouvard’s everyday utterances, and even the language immediately
surrounding it in the text. If given more time, it would be interesting
to study what particular discourses Flaubert involves to achieve the
“layered” effect and aid in the transition from fragment to nonfragment.
And one place to begin might be when Flaubert appears to contemplate the
role of the novel both in his “Dictionary of Accepted Ideas” and Bouvard
and Pécuchet’s experience with the historical novels – novels that
arrange fact with fiction and despite lacking historical accuracy,
provide lifelike depictions and a complete illusion to the two gentlemen

+ Does the novel spring from the *Dictionary of Accepted Ideas*? Should
we read this as his philosophy of life or literature? Is it just another
compilation of facts that he inserts into a larger project? 

+ Can we speculate, from Flaubert’s chapter outlines and the concluding chapters
of the books and Deborah’s paper, how he makes the transition from
research to plot outlines to the novel? Can we connect this to Barthes’s
theory of novel writing?

[3:15]

#### Untangling Theories and Facts, Past and Present, Truth and Fiction

> Does our idiom contain definite and indefinite articles, as in Latin?
Some say yes, others no. They didn’t dare decide. The verb must always
agree with the subject, except in instances when the verb does not
agree. In earlier times, there was no distinction drawn between the
verbal adjective and the present participle. The Academy has now created
one, but it isn’t easy to grasp. They were amazed to learn that the
pronoun their is used for people but also for things, while that is used
for things but sometimes for people… Other difficulties: ‘around’ and
‘surrounding,’ between which Racine and Boileau saw no difference;
‘croak’ and ‘caw,’ confused by La Fontaine, who could nonetheless tell a
crow from a frog. The grammarians themselves disagreed, some finding
beauty where others saw errors. They admitted principles but ignored the
consequences, proclaimed consequences but refused the principles, leaned
on tradition but rejected the masters, and came up with bizarre
refinements… They concluded that syntax was a fantasy and grammar an
illusion. p. 127-8

+ Bouvard and Pecuchet are constantly mixing up theories with facts and
try to reconcile theories which cannot be reconciled. They become
frustrated and then move on to the next project. Flaubert uses this
pattern to comic effect, so he draws a distinction between theory and
fact for himself and the reader. In what way is a theory “real” or
signalled to be “real” and how is this different from the way a fact is
brought up in the text? Does he include many concrete facts, or just
facts about theories? + What does this say about Flaubert’s research
practices and his incorporation of his research into the novel? Is
Flaubert writing about the past or the present? Is he drawing on his
present reading experience even as he is writing about past theories and
people’s past interpretation of facts?

+ Does Flaubert as the author get to interact with concrete facts in a
way that Bouvard and Pecuchet do not? Do facts only exist through
present observation of the characters and the author? Are there past
facts for Flaubert?

> As they had experienced and believed they had observed, they deemed
themselves ready to write. Plays were awkward because of the limitations
on setting. Novels offered more freedom. To write one, they searched
their own memories. Pécuchet recalled one of his office managers, a
thoroughly unpleasant individual, and he thought to avenge himself with
a book. Bouvard had once known an old writing teacher at the café, a
miserable drunk. How funny it would be to use him as a character. (128)

+ What is Flaubert saying here about writing novels? Does Barthes agree
with Flaubert? Is one’s ability to write a novel based largely in
memory?

3:40

###End of class - let’s talk SHS paper

+ At some point we need to talk Barsetshire Project

+ Check out our research doc for Geoff’s link to Amazon reviews of (B + P)[http://www.amazon.com/review/RZOHCGG5ZHO49/ref=cm_cr_dp_cmt?ie=UTF8&ASIN=1564783936&channel=detail-glance&nodeID=283155&store=books#wasThisHelpful] - he's added some excerpts in the Week 9 research doc. 

+ Of possible interest: a Lady Audley’s Secret competition from the
ICVWW: http://ladyaudleysecret.com/

#### March 16: the preparation of the novel some topics: encyclopedia, +
Flaubert, Bouvard et Pécuchet, The Dictionary of Received Ideas +
Explore http://flaubert.univ-rouen.fr/bouvard_et_pecuchet/ and
http://gallica.bnf.fr/to nb: You will find you need surprisingly little
(or no) French to learn something about Flaubert’s research practices
from his digitized notes and manuscript pages, but give yourself time. +
return to Roland Barthes, “The Reality Effect” + selections from Roland
Barthes, *Roland Barthes on Roland Barthes* [Sophie] + selections from
Roland Barthes, *The Preparation of the Novel** [Emily] discussion and
outline: Emily and Geoff; close reading: Alli; criticism summary: Emily
and Sophie; seminar paper: Deb; break: Deb